Question 1: Was high-energy present?
The energy assessment method is built upon evidence that
serious injuries are the result of some undesirable contact with
energy. This applies across energy forms like gravity, motion,
mechanical, electrical, pressure, sound, radiation, biological,
chemical, and temperature (Figure 4). Existing peer-reviewed
literature took this a step further, showing that the magnitude of
physical energy predicts the most likely severity of an injury or
condition (Hallowell, 2017). Specifically, incidents with more than
500 foot-pounds (ft-lb) of energy are more likely to be a SIF than
not. Therefore, the term ‘high-energy’ refers to a condition where
the physical energy exceeds 500 ft-lb, which corresponds to a
condition where the most likely outcome of an incident is a SIF.
See Appendix 4 for the energy-severity distributions.
Because energy assessment can be challenging, two sets of resources were developed. The
first is a set of icons that build upon the previous methods of SIF assessment. Each icon
shown in Figure 5 on the next page corresponds to a hazardous condition where the energy
magnitude almost always far exceeds the 500-ft-lb threshold. These icons are explained in
further detail in Appendix 2.

APPENDIX 1 - GLOSSARY
Capacity: Incident with a release of high energy in the presence of a direct control where a
serious injury is not sustained.
Direct Control: A barrier that is specifically targeted to the high-energy source; effectively
mitigates exposure to the high-energy source when installed, verified, and used properly; and
is effective even if there is unintentional human error during work that is unrelated to the
installation of the control.
Energy Contact: Instance when high energy is transmitted to the human body.
Energy Proximity: A circumstance where a high-energy source may be within 6 feet of a
worker before being contained or any distance when there is restricted egress from the
energy source.
Energy Release: An instance where energy source changes state and is exposed to the
environment.
Exposure: Condition where high energy is present in the absence of a direct control.
High Energy: An element of work that involves more than 500 ft-lbs of physical energy.
High-Energy Incident: An instance where the high-energy source was released and where
the worker came in contact with or proximity to the high-energy source.
High-Energy Serious Injury or Fatality (HSIF): Incident with a release of high energy in the
absence of a direct control where a serious injury is sustained.
Low-Energy Serious Injury or Fatality (LSIF): Incident with a release of low energy in the
absence of a direct control where a serious injury is sustained.
Low Severity: Incident with a release of low energy where no serious injury is sustained.
Potential Serious Injury or Fatality (PSIF): Incident with a release of high energy in the
absence of a direct control where a serious injury is not sustained.
Serious Injury or Fatality: Life-threatening or life-altering incident as defined by the EEI SIF
Criteria.
Success: Condition where a high-energy incident does not occur because of the presence of
a direct control.

APPENDIX 2 - ICONS FOR ASSESSING SIF POTENTIAL
Suspended Load: Most suspended loads require specialty equipment to lift more than 500 lbs of
load higher than 1 foot off the ground. In such a case, the suspended load would
be more than the high-energy threshold. 
Fall From Elevation: Considering the average weight of a human is over 150 lbs, 4 feet of elevation
(measured from the ground surface to the bottom of the feet) exceeds the highenergy threshold.
Mobile Equipment/Traffic With Workers on Foot: Because of the mass, most mobile equipment, including motor vehicles, exceeds
the high-energy threshold when the equipment or vehicle is in motion. The
energy exposure is taken from the point of view of the worker on foot and not
the equipment operator or vehicle driver.
Note: For work zone traffic only, an incident occurs only when a vehicle departs
from the intended path of travel and is within 6 ft of an exposed employee or if
an employee enters the traffic pattern.
Motor Vehicle Incident (occupant): Estimates of the motor vehicle speed typically involved in serious or fatal
crashes vary greatly from the National Transportation Safety Board, National
Highway Transportation Safety Association, and the U.S. Department of
Transportation. The team selected a conservative estimate of 30 miles per hour
as the high-energy threshold. This energy exposure is taken from the point of
view of the vehicle occupants, including the driver. 
Heavy Rotating Equipment: Computing mechanical energy can be complex, as it requires estimates of the
moment of inertia and angular velocity for rotating objects and stiffness and
displacement for tension or compression. Thus, all heavy rotating equipment
beyond powered hand tools typically exceed the high-energy threshold and
should be considered high-energy.
High Temperature: According to the American Burn Association, exposure to any substance greater
than or equal to 150 degrees Fahrenheit typically cause third degree burns when
contacted for 2 seconds or more. 
Steam: According to the American Burn Association, any circumstance with the release
of steam exceeds the high-energy threshold.
Fire With Sustained Fuel Source: According to the North American Combustion Handbook, a lightly combustible
material like paper burns at approximately 700 degrees Fahrenheit, far
exceeding the temperature threshold. Fire with a sustained source of fuel
exceeds the high-energy threshold.
Explosion: Most incidents described as an explosion exceed the high-energy threshold.
Excavation or Trench: An exposure to unsupported soil in a trench or excavation that exceeds 5 feet of
height exceeds the high-energy threshold. Typically, for each foot of depth, soil
pressure increases by about 40 pounds per square foot. Thus, at 5 feet of depth,
the pressure is approximately 200 psf.
Electrical Contact With Source: Electricity equal to or exceeding 50 volts is sufficient to result in serious injury or
death according to the NFPA 70E.
Arc Flash: Any arc flash exceeds the high-energy threshold because of the voltage
exposure, according to the NFPA 70E. Also, permissible distances are covered in
OSHA Standard 1910.333 and section 1910.333(c)(3)(ii)(C) in particular.
High Dose of Toxic Chemical or Radiation: Exposure to toxic chemicals or radiation. An industrial hygienist, chemist,
toxicologist, or other qualified person should be involved in the assessment of
toxicity and acceptable exposure limits. The following reference should be used
to judge acceptable exposure limits:
? Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health (IDLH) Values from the Center
for Disease Control: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/idlh/intridl4.html
? Exposures which reduce oxygen (O2) levels below 16%
? Corrosive chemical exposures (pH <2 or >12.5)